All right. here we go.
Previously on "Blind Frog Ranch"...
It's gold.
Just plain as day.
The keyhole chamber excavation
validated the team's hunt
for riches in the Uintas.
This was actually Aztec.
Extremely unusual.
The fact that we tested these
bars and the results came out
as they did kind of proves that
it is Aztec gold.
And while deciphering a coded
map from the Rhoades Journal.
Ron and James believe
they found a location
of more Aztec gold.
Maybe this Golden Staircase
holds this treasure.
But a specific line has
piqued James' interest.
Big hands hold safe
the Golden Staircase.
Now. Josh and Chili are on
a ground hunt to identify
landmarks that match the symbols
on the Golden Staircase map.
We're right about here.
But the unfamiliar wilderness
northwest of the ranch
has them questioning
the authenticity of the map...
This isn't looking right.
And the future of their hunt for gold.
I thought we were really on
the right track. but now
we're kind of lost.
Where the hell do you go with it?
I just don't know. Alex.
Legends of ancient treasures...
It could go thousands of years back.
And unexplained phenomena...
I'm not messing with that.
Meet at a 160-acre property
in northeast Utah
known as Blind Frog Ranch.
For decades. teams have
searched the land for
- long-lost Aztec gold.
- But the closer they get...
Look at that! That's gold!
The harder the land fights back.
Whoa! What the hell's going on?
Now. a prolific miner...
We're standing on a pile of gold.
And a legendary treasure hunter...
There must be another tunnel
entrance. something.
- Armed with new evidence...
- Look at this.
- What the hell is this?
- And a fabled artifact...
There's a date on that. 1912.
Will take on a 500-year-old curse...
Fire in the hole!
And a land littered with traps...
Whoa. whoa. whoa!
To find a $3 billion treasure.
Whoa!
They won't stop until
they uncovered the mystery of
what lurks below...
- Guys. it's caving.
- Run!
At Blind Frog Ranch.
I mean. this just looks like nothing.
Like. I would think that
we'd have found more than this.
Where the hell do you go with it?
Josh and Chili are following
clues left behind
in a 19th-century treasure
hunter's enigmatic journal.
hoping it leads them to
the Golden Staircase.
a location the team believes
is one of seven chambers
storing lost Aztec treasure.
Let's just keep on heading
down the mountain.
Hopefully something will pop up.
But as they search the Utah wilderness
for the cryptic markers on the map.
it's unclear whether
they're chasing real leads...
I don't know what else to do.
Or dead ends.
I mean. just keep your eyes
peeled for anything.
any kind of.
any kind of workings where
people have been before.
We've learned a lot from
this journal and believe
this Golden Staircase is exactly
where the treasure is.
but there is still a ton of
information in there
that we don't fully understand.
We have these symbols on
the map. and we don't know
what they mean.
So we're just looking for
anything that looks like what
we're seeing on the map.
because every marker we find
out here puts us on
Thomas Rhoades' trail.
Yo. check this out.
Look at that.
I think it's a sinkhole.
But if you're describing the area.
- ridgeline's behind us.
- Yeah.
We're right here in this drainage.
Here's that symbol right there
at the top of the drainage.
And that's exactly where we're at.
I mean. and that's like
a bowl shape on here.
I mean. I wish it would have
more. like. reference points
where you could tell. like. distances.
I'll buy it. We just came off the cliff.
And it's right in the general area.
You're right. And it lines right up
the way you were saying.
We assume that this symbol
matches up with this sinkhole.
then we got to keep heading
down this direction.
I'll follow you.
We're right on the trail.
Josh and Chili believe
they found the first marker
on the map. a sinkhole long grown over.
So they set their sights on the next...
See this symbol here?
Kind of looks like a big. old H.
Which they believe could
mark the location
of the Golden Staircase itself.
Should we spread out a little bit. or...?
Maybe you should check out this ravine.
- All right.
- And then I'll head off this way.
We need to look in
every nook and cranny.
H marks the spot.
That looks like a structure.
Well. hell yes it is.
Look at this.
Look at this!
Alex!
I got something!
Damn!
Look how old this stuff is.
This is from the 1800s for sure.
1850s. 1860s.
Why would somebody build this
way out here
in the middle of nowhere?
I mean. it's not a hunting cabin.
- No.
- They didn't build cabins like this to go hunting
in the 1800s. So there's none of that.
And I don't see any evidence of mining.
But think about it.
Somebody spent a lot of effort
building this thing.
They were doing something
important here.
This...
What if that symbol is
this cabin right here?
The symbol is the cabin.
Think about it.
We're in the middle of nowhere.
This is the only man-made
structure we've seen. right?
And look at that. Look at that.
We came down this drainage.
boom. and there's a freaking
structure here.
That's no coincidence. man.
There's that big H symbol.
I think it's this cabin right here.
Look. we're in the middle of
nowhere. and finding this cabin
tells me that somebody was
here long-term.
If I were drawing a map to tell
somebody where to go. I would
put a symbol on the map for this cabin.
I can definitely see that.
I mean. there's a big effort
done here to build this.
So now if this matches the way you say.
where does that lead us next?
That's what I don't know.
I'm not seeing a cave entrance.
I'm not seeing any rock formations.
- carvings. artifacts. anything that...
- Markings.
We might find. There's nothing else.
I have no idea how
this whole thing relates to
the Golden Staircase.
But if Rhoades built a cabin
here. then that means that this
is an area that he was
extensively searching.
My question is. what were
they actually trying to find?
What the hell is it for?
We need to figure out exactly
what that connection is.
The H is the last symbol on the map.
I want to bring this to my dad
and see if there's
any other clues the journal can give us.
Chili and I had a good trip out there.
We followed the map.
Back from his expedition with Chili.
Josh meets with his father. Ron.
to try to figure out the meaning of
the cabin and what it means
for their gold hunt.
So we got out there.
and sure enough. we come across
this big sinkhole.
Maybe that symbol was showing
this depression here?
It's very prominent.
It's a dominant-looking feature
out there in the forest.
But there's not a whole lot to it.
No caves. no evidence of mining.
And that kind of gave us
an idea of scale. like from
the ridge to this sinkhole.
probably a third of a mile.
See. this is about equidistance.
- this next symbol here.
- This next symbol.
And that got me excited
because I'm thinking.
all right. the next symbol down.
I'm hoping it's the Golden Staircase.
And we hiked about
another third of a mile.
and in the forest. there is
this really large cabin.
Look at this.
Old cabin. We're talking 1800s for sure.
Why the hell would somebody
build this out here?
And I mean. they went to a lot of work
to make this thing happen.
You got to understand.
we're in the middle of nowhere.
There's no roads. There's no trails.
There's nothing in there.
I'm thinking. why would
somebody go through
so much work to build
such a large cabin out here?
I remember something here.
Let me see in the journal.
It's...
Here.
So look at this packing list.
Saddle bags
and groceries and equipment.
There's shopping lists like
this throughout the journal.
This is just one of them.
Well. where do you think this is going?
I think possibly Rhoades.
Thomas Rhoades.
built that to work out from.
and he used this as his base.
And look at the date here. April 1853.
That's just about Rhoades'
time out there.
This can't just be a coincidence.
The map in the journal takes us
to this cabin.
Right.
So why would he draw the map
to the cabin?
Well. that might have
been as far as he got.
I mean. the fact that this map
takes you to the cabin tells me
he never found the Golden Staircase.
It's still laying there untouched.
And this is where he last searched for it.
Rhoades built his cabin here.
because he felt like he was
close to finding the Golden Staircase.
So he did believe that
it was somewhere close.
Exactly.
That's why he built the cabin right there.
Let's get with the guys.
kind of decide on a plan. OK?
But if Rhoades thought this was
an important place. then maybe
we should. too.
You know. in the beginning.
when we saw this marker.
we thought it was kind of the end of
the Golden Staircase. but in
reality. it's the beginning.
The cabin indicates that this
is the beginning of their hunt.
We might be close to where
Rhoades left off in his search.
Let's finish the job.
2 I mean. the fact that this map
takes you to the cabin tells me
he never found the Golden Staircase.
It's still laying there untouched.
And this is where he last searched for it.
The team is following a map
to a location they believe
may hold more Aztec gold.
a place known as
the Golden Staircase.
But their search on the ground
has led them to
the mysterious ruins of a cabin...
What the hell is it for?
One they believe may have
served as a base camp
for Thomas Rhoades.
If Rhoades thought this
was an important place.
then maybe we should. too.
Meanwhile. James has been
doing research into a theory
he thinks could help them find the gold.
This is fantastic. That's interesting.
A theory that was triggered
by a line written
in the Golden Staircase map.
Big hands hold safe
the Golden Staircase.
When Dr. Blomquist was
reading the translation.
big hands hold safe
to the Golden Staircase.
that really hit me pretty hard
because a lot of the information
in my data collection
has been about these
past cultures that have lived
up here in this area of Utah.
Every single one seems to
have this story.
this oral tradition. this
information about these people
of great stature...
Giants. right where we are today.
up in the Uinta Mountains
and in the Uinta Basin.
For generations.
Indigenous history has told of
the Si-Te-Cah. a fierce tribe
of red-haired giants said to
have clashed with local tribes
across what is now Utah
and Nevada before vanishing
into history.
According to legend.
they were drawn to the land
for its resources. including gold.
Centuries later. as prospectors
tore through the same land.
they encountered ancient cave
systems and unusual remains
that blurred the line
between folklore and fact.
The giants of legend in this
region are just larger people.
and it makes me wonder.
could the native lore of
this area have been part of
the journal's clues?
Maybe it's going to lead us
to the Golden Staircase.
I appreciate you coming out.
James has sought out Don Mitchell.
a local Shoshone tribe member
and Native historian to
learn more about the mythology
of giants in the Utah region.
- Petroglyphs have been part of creation myths of...
- Right.
Of Native Americans
for many. many a tribe for over
the thousands of years.
Don has taken James to see
archaeological evidence
of the myths up close.
When you look at the height of
these anthropomorphic figures.
you can't help but get
your imagination going.
Tell me. you know.
what I'm looking at here.
Are we looking at giants?
We are.
The Omahas. the Tuscaroras.
the Iroquois. they have legends
and stories of the "bias." which is "big."
What we would call giants.
Some of the stories are.
well. these giants were able to
pick up boulders the size of
men and build structures
in their instruction.
That's always been known in
Native American culture that
us as the people ain't the only ones.
Everyone that came in the late
1600s into the late 1800s
spoke of giants.
Wow!
What is very interesting
is. if you look at some of
the other petroglyphs.
the circle there and the spiral.
they've said that that's the circle of life.
He is touching that.
But the other thing that
the figure is touching.
what is the meaning of that?
I think that you all need to study that.
Seeing these petroglyphs up
close got me kind of thinking.
big hands hold the treasure safe.
And we see these petroglyphs.
What do you see?
Giants. Gods.
Maybe that's what he meant
by big hands.
So what is the other symbol?
Just seems to be like this missing aspect
that may be able to help us.
We followed along this area
here. and that brought us into
an old cabin.
So. not the Golden Staircase.
But obviously. Rhoades is
marking that on this map.
So it's important to him.
The next morning. Josh gathers
the team to discuss the cabin
discovery and its connection
to the Golden Staircase.
But James believes he's made
a breakthrough that could
lead them to the gold.
So I was thinking
about when Dr. Blomquist
translated that passage.
big hands or these large hands
protect the treasure.
You know. a lot of what
I've been looking at in
my data collection has been
about these past cultures
that have lived up here.
where we're at in the Uinta Basin
and the Uinta Mountains.
The Timpanogos. the Ute.
the Paiute. every single one
seems to have this story.
this oral tradition
about giants.
And I always hate
to use the word or this term
because people jump to
conclusions when I say giants.
I'm talking about people of large stature.
I'm not talking about 20-foot people.
I'm talking about people that
were seven feet tall. you know?
So. James. how does it connect
to Thomas Rhoades?
Well. when Dr. Blomquist
translated that passage.
big hands hold safe
to the Golden Staircase.
I thought. well. what if Rhoades
really meant it in literal terms
of great. big. large hands?
What if it was a clue to the map?
It got me to thinking about.
you know. some of
the petroglyphs in the area.
and I contacted Don Mitchell.
who's a Native American medicine man.
and he took me out to
McKee Spring Petroglyphs.
There was this long gallery
of rock art that went on for
hundreds and hundreds of feet.
There was one specific
petroglyph. and it looked like
a tree. just this single tree.
And one figure was holding it in its hand.
Big hands hold safe
at the Golden Staircase.
What if that's what Rhoades
was referring to?
In the journal. this.
The standalone tree on the map.
I mean. if what you're
saying is true. and that there's
this symbolism with these
large people and large hands.
and it's around these trees.
That's the exact type of secret code
a treasure hunter would leave on a map.
We found these trees up here.
That's how we orientated ourselves to
the other landmarks.
But we never really thought twice
about that tree down there.
When you're treasure hunting.
you gotta be rational.
You gotta be methodical.
But I have to consider every crazy idea
you can possibly imagine.
Hell. James could be right.
And if he is. it could lead us
in a direction that we have
never been before.
And that is what excites me the most.
I suddenly thought about
the fact that what do we have
on some of the cliffs here
at Blind Frog Ranch?
What's the first thing that
you usually see
when you come up over the hillside?
- Trees.
- The trees.
- Lone pines that are across the land.
- Exactly.
We have these majestic-looking
trees that just stand out.
Yeah. lone pines have been
growing on those cliffs for
- thousands of years.
- Right.
I mean. that's a defining feature
when you're out in the wilderness.
That's something that you're
gonna write down and describe.
I mean. we thought that these
lines here and this one tree
was just to kind of help
place us right here
in the middle to the cabin.
But what if this is actually
a continuation of the trail?
It's trying to tell us. no. this is what
you're looking for.
This is more important
than we originally thought.
Based on the things that you have found.
you think you can find that cliff line?
Where that lone tree is?
This is the ridge we came down
to find the cabin.
So we know exactly which
direction we'll have to go.
And then. what's this symbol
right here below?
Don't know.
- You see that?
- Yeah. I see it.
Because if this is indeed
a cliff line. and this is
indeed a lone pine.
then we really are looking for
this cliff line. and then trying to figure out
what the hell that symbol is below it.
Right.
Following footsteps. boys.
Following history.
2 It's a thick forest.
Back in the Utah wilderness.
Josh and James use the cabin
as a starting point and to travel
east in search of a lone pine
that could lead them
to the Golden Staircase.
So I'm thinking we head off this direction.
Right now. that's all we really
got to go on.
Hey. Josh.
It opens up right up here.
What do you think?
Well...
- We'd have to head...
- South more.
Right this way.
So then we would be looking for
a singular tree. one that
really stands out.
- OK.
- So I'm thinking
we head off this direction. and then if
we see a lone tree.
I mean. it should be noticeable.
Right now. that's all
we really got to go on.
Fingers crossed.
Treasure maps. they're not always right.
I mean. yeah.
that's what we're up against.
But the journal...
has got us this far.
I mean. this area could fit that journal.
Sure seems like it.
- Hey. Josh?
- Yeah?
Look at that tree over there.
That is a big. old tree. too.
I mean. that could go back
quite a ways. right?
I mean. it's in the right direction.
I think we should go
over there and take a look.
We don't have a lot to go on.
but we got to take a look at it.
James spotted a tree way out
in the distance.
and I'm hoping it's the tree
that's symbolized on the map.
But it's not the lone tree itself.
It's the lone tree gets us to
the area to look for
that other symbol that's
on the map. because I think that
that is where the map is
trying to take us to.
This thing is old.
It definitely would fit the timeline.
That's the granddaddy of ponderosas.
I think it's a lightning
strike right down the middle.
- Look at that!
- That is a lightning strike.
This tree feels right.
I mean. it's this very old pine.
It's right on the edge of the cliff.
It's been struck by lightning.
There is something to this place.
Maybe this is the place the map
is trying to bring us to.
I mean. they could have just
used the fact that this was
struck by lightning as the mark itself.
and they didn't actually do anything.
They just used a natural marking.
Well. all right.
we're in the right spot.
Where the hell do we go from here?
If this journal's right.
and if this is the tree we're looking for.
it's showing that there's
something past this tree.
- And the only past I see is down.
- Is down.
On the map. the symbol is
down below the tree.
And I'm thinking. we need to
go down there.
It's possible they might have
put something on the cliff face.
an arrow. something that
points towards an entrance.
Thinking rappelling?
- Yeah. you got a rope.
- Yeah. I got a rope.
- I got a harness.
- Let's do it.
Maybe there's something in the rock.
Maybe they built something.
Anything that does not look natural.
- Everything look good?
- Yeah. you look solid.
OK. here goes.
I'm not seeing anything too exciting.
- I'm down!
- All right.
I'm not seeing anything. either.
OK.
If it wasn't on that cliff.
it has to be around here somewhere.
Do you want to split up?
We'll look for that marker.
- Yeah. maybe I'll check down this direction here.
- Yeah.
- We'll just kind of...
- I'll go all the way through here.
This could be a carving in stone.
could be some type of frickin' marker.
But right now. I don't see anything.
I don't even know
what it's supposed to be.
I'm just envisioning it's something
carved into the hillside.
Everything looks the same here.
All this rock has just fallen
from the Cliffside.
I'm just not seeing anything.
It's kind of...
Doesn't that look weird to you?
It's right below that tree. too.
I mean. it looks like a stone door.
It doesn't look like
anything else around here.
- Hey. James.
- Go ahead.
I want you to come down here
and take a look at something.
I think I found our symbol.
2 holy.
This looks like a doorway.
Like you could almost walk in
if it wasn't made of stone.
And then this was kind of like
shoved in here and these blocks
were put on the end to hold it.
So I think that this is
that symbol on the map.
There's this giant boulder.
I mean. it looks like a stone door.
That's something that sticks out to me.
And this could have been used
to mark this spot.
- We're right below our freaking tree. right there.
- Yeah. right below the tree.
Look. we were looking for
a marker. but I didn't think
we were going to find anything like this.
This looks different.
I mean. when I saw this. I knew
instantly this has to be
the symbol on the map.
I mean. we started at the ridge line.
and then we found the sinkhole
and the old cabin
where they probably lived
while searching for
the Golden Staircase.
That led us to the tree
and now to this doorway.
What if there is a cave
underneath here or some sort
of a mine? What if this is an entrance?
We gotta get in here. I don't know
how the hell to freaking do it right now.
That looks like one heavy son of a bitch.
We can't really work it by hand.
We'd still have to get past
these giant stone slabs.
And in order to move those.
we need heavy machinery
in here. and we can't get
heavy machinery here.
It's just too steep and rugged.
We're too far out here.
And unfortunately.
we're also near a creek bed.
It's not legal for. like. to come
out here with high explosives
and blast this thing.
So. we're gonna have to find
another way around that.
In Utah. using explosives near
critical environmental areas.
such as creeks and waterways.
is heavily regulated.
And due to the site's proximity
to a creek bed.
blasting is out of the question.
This site is very inaccessible.
We're not gonna be able to get
heavy machinery in here.
We can't just come in here
and just remove the rock.
I mean. we're not gonna be able
to hand-dig this thing.
I mean. it's gonna take us
months or years.
So. I'm not exactly sure how
we're gonna be able to work
with this area. but there's something of
great importance here. I can feel it.
I think this rock was put here
on purpose. and I think it is
absolutely described
on that map in the journal.
But how in the hell do we get in here?
Why don't we head back.
talk to everybody. see what
ideas we can come up with?
Because. I mean. you're right.
we gotta get in there.
Plain and simple.
Duane's waiting on our call.
Let's fill him in on everything.
Back at the hideout.
after the journal led them to
what appears to be
a man-made stone door...
Doesn't that look weird to you?
The team gathers for a call
with Duane. the owner of.
Blind Frog Ranch. to fill him
in on their progress.
- Hey. Duane.
- Hi. Duane.
- Good to see you.
Hey. guys. How's it going?
We've been on quite
an adventure following that
journal through the mountains.
We found this huge stone.
It's a giant rectangle. It looks like a door.
So we know that there's
something important there.
because that's exactly where
the journal took us to.
but it's just too big to move.
We can't drill right behind it.
It's a pretty steep slope right
behind this rock. kind of even
a small rig we couldn't get in there.
- I'd love to blow it. but...
- It's on the creek.
It's down in the creek.
and you know the local regulations.
we can't blast down in there.
Well. there's something I heard
about that could help us.
You can use that SAR.
It's synthetic-aperture radar.
What would that do for us?
Well. it's cutting-edge technology
that sort of sees into the Earth.
We fly a grid right over
that area. and you'll be able
to see cavities.
We can't drill it where it is.
but if we can identify that
cavity and just see how
extensive it is. we can look
for an entry point away from
the creek bed on flat ground
where we can possibly drill.
Then we go in there.
Synthetic-aperture radar.
or SAR. works by sending
microwave pulses into the ground to map
hidden structures and voids.
Scientists and archaeologists
use it to reveal what lies
beneath without ever digging.
Recently. SAR scanning
uncovered incredible structures
deep beneath the Great Pyramids
of Giza in Egypt and a second
giant Sphinx statue standing
nearly 250 feet high.
The team hopes that using
a plane-based version of
this technology. they can map
out underground voids in the area
beyond the stone door
and an alternative entrance
that's easier to penetrate.
Well. we need an airplane for it.
Perfect. Perfect.
We'll lay out a grid.
and we'll do the survey.
and we'll keep our fingers crossed.
- All right.
- Let's get moving.
- Thank you. Duane.
- We'll be in touch.
It's the day of the SAR survey.
Chili. come in.
Yeah. man.
We're ready here on the ground.
Go ahead and get ready
for your first flyover.
I'm ready if you're ready.
While Chili meets the pilot.
Josh and aerial imagery
specialist Matt Ward
set up the flyover zone.
As long as he gets that
plane right on the same lines.
we should see a lot of stuff under there.
SAR is a new version of
ground-penetrating radar.
- Clear.
- It's kind of revolutionary.
It's gonna be used for
basically finding anything
that's underneath the bedrock
that we can't see right now.
The lower you get.
the more you can see underground.
So he's got to make
the pass several times. right?
Yeah. That's got to be
on the exact same line.
So the more times he makes the passes.
- the deeper it will go.
- Yeah.
The plane will pass over a broad area
with the stone door as the starting point.
The team's goal is to confirm
their belief of a void
or cavern system behind the door
and locate entry points
where they can blast or drill
and gain access to
whatever's hidden below.
- 2 - It's got to be them. right?
- Yeah.
Yeah. there they are. right there.
See 'em just up that way.
As Chili and the pilot enter the airspace
above Blind Frog Ranch.
Josh and aerial imagery
specialist Matt Ward get ready
on the ground.
They'll monitor the progress
of the scan and communicate
with Chili to ensure he stays on course.
So basically. this is going to
show us where the plane is
coming across. but it has to be on
the exact same plane every single scan.
But if they do veer off.
we're going to have to go
and try it again.
OK. so this will show if
they're veering off course?
- Yes.
- So we'll be able to correct them
- in real time...
- In real time.
To make sure that they're staying.
they can do the next pass exact.
Exactly. yep.
The lower they get. we're
going to be able to see
- more underneath.
- OK. all right. good.
For every pass. the radar can
see 50 feet further
below the surface.
The team has decided that
four passes. or 200 feet.
will be deep enough to detect voids.
OK. we're ready for them.
Look for the truck.
You'll need to run a straight
line on the exact same route.
We need to make at least four passes.
Should pop right up over the ridge.
There he is. right there. Here he comes.
That's pretty good height.
but if he could get just
a little lower on each pass.
The lower altitude
you can come. the better.
Copy that.
Cut hard back to the truck.
Yeah. that's good.
Here they come.
- That's perfect.
- Perfect.
That's perfect.
Chili. that was beautiful.
Stay on the same exact line.
I need three more identical
to the last one.
With one perfect pass
complete. Chili and the pilot
now need to do three more
flyovers. dropping 50 feet
closer to the ground after
each successful pass.
Come through?
It looks like we're getting a good one.
- That was a good one.
- That's perfect.
Chili. if you can hear me.
that was frigging
right on. man. You nailed it. Chili.
- Perfect.
- Beautiful.
Now we have two.
We have two solid passes.
That was beautiful.
Need you to come harder to your right.
Chili. that was beautiful.
We got 150-foot depth.
We need one more to get 200 feet.
OK. here we come.
Chili. come in. I'm not reading you well.
Are you guys all right?
What is that?
What the... What is that?
Chili. chili. I'm just getting static.